                                                          4-20-2021

EXTERNAL DEVICES THAT ENCOUNTER A PROBLEM WHEN ATTEMPTING A COMPUTER RESET WITH THE 326298 MOTHERBOARD

     Accessories to the Commodore series of computers are being developed all the time. I recently became aware of a problem with the early C64 board 326298 when I was asked to modifiy it to allow use of something called BackBit which crashes that computer but works fine with all other versions of motherboard. 
     The problem has to do with how that computer reset is generated when the computer is powered up. The reset circuit is different than in later boards which use a different arrangement. They generate a brief positive going pulse output on U20 pin 9 which goes into a buffer IC U8 that inverts the pulse. This provides the necessary negative pulse requirement and U8 has an open collector output with a pull-up resistor, so that line can be pulled down externally without a problem in all later boards. The early board can be modified to work the same way with two minor circuit changes.
     The early board reset circuit U20 pin 9 maintains a logic low at powerup which goes high within half a second, and this satisfies the requirements for a system reset. However, any 'downstream' reset attempt with the original 326298 board wiring is not a good idea. The source of the logic high after reset on that line is the direct output of a 556 timer IC which sources quite a bit of current. Forcing that line low can eventually overload the IC U20 and burn it out. I have seen one modification that uses a 100 ohm resistor in series with
pin 9 after cutting a board trace, so the line can be pulled down safely. 
     A better way to modify the original 326298 reset circuit is to install a 1K pull-up resistor in an unpopulated space at the left edge of the board marked R36. Then cut U20 pin 9 close to the body of the IC so it doesn't make contact with the circuit below and doesn't change the rest of the circuit. There is a factory jumper wire connecting U20 pins 9 and 13 which could be mounted on either side of the board. If it's on top, it should be moved to the underside so IC pin 9 -only- can be disconnected from the circuit. With these changes, the negative going output pulse now comes from IC pin 13. Inside the IC this is an open-collector output which, with R36 pull-up added, satisfies the requirement of the board reset and works for external devices such as Backit or a user reset switch. 
     Ideally, an added reset switch should use the existing reset IC U20 circuit instead of pulling the output line down. There are examples of such modifications here on my website.

Ray Carlsen
