            A/V CABLES FOR COMMODORE COMPUTERS   5-23-2014

     There are lots of cables out there and none of them are wired the
same as an original Commodore. CBM made two types. The earliest was a
two-wire used with the VIC20, with one plug each for video and audio.
That cable will also work with all versions of the C64. Early C64
boards and the VIC20 have a five pin DIN A/V socket, and later C64's
and the C128 series use an 8 pin DIN. I admit I'm not sure who made
that particular cable.
     The next Commodore cable type was a three-wire made for use only
with the three rear inputs of a Commodore monitor (1702, 1084, etc.)
because it separated the luminance (black and white signal) from the
chroma (color information), which is similar to contemporary S-video.
That cable has eight pins in the DIN plug to match the A/V socket of
later C64's and the 128 and that arrangement produces the best picture 
on a Commodore monitor. The three colored plugs of that cable match 
the three colored input jacks on the rear of the monitor. Make sure 
the monitor switch is in the correct position to use those rear input 
jacks. Although most Commodore monitors use the three RCA jacks for 
Y/C video and audio, one has a different connector. The CBM 1902A 
monitor has a 6 pin DIN and requires the appropriate cable (6 pin DIN
to 8 Pin DIN) for use with the computer. If that 6 pin looks familiar, 
it's the same as used on the computer for its serial cable. 
     Later Commodore computers including the C128 still have a single
composite output so any video monitor will work with the appropriate
cable. Note: the Commodore three-wire cable will not work with a
composite (single wire for video) monitor. The resulting video will be
black and white only. Obviously a three wire (8 pin DIN) cable will
not work with the VIC20 or the early version C64 as those computers 
use a five pin DIN A/V jack.

FOUR WIRE CABLES AND COMMODORE COMPUTERS

     OK, now it gets complicated... there are lots of four wire cables
out there and none of them were original Commodore AFAIK. They all use
a five pin DIN connector and the colors of the wires will -not- match
the Commodore receptacles (yellow for video, etc.). There are even
different color combinations with different four wire cables! These
cables go all the way back to the 1960's. They were originally used in
European audio systems. I first saw DIN connectors in Germany when I
was in the Army in 1965.
     If you have a four-wire cable, it will probably still work with
your Commodore computer but you must find the plug combinations that
matches your monitor. Of course the colors will not match. NOTE: one
of those wires of the four wire cable will connect directly to the SID
audio -input-. If that plug touches anything metal with the computer
on, it can instantly destroy the SID (sound chip). Ask me how I know.

FOUR WIRE CABLE CONNECTIONS WITH A COMMODORE (OR OTHER) MONITOR

    If you have a Commodore monitor but no matching three wire cable, 
you might have to make do with the more common four wire cable. Switch 
the CBM monitor to its front inputs. Use those for composite, not the 
rear S-video jacks. Now, Commodore monitor or not, connect one of the 
four plugs to the video input of your monitor (yellow socket) and turn 
the computer on. If the opening screen comes up, that's your composite 
video line. If the picture has no color, that's video but it's not 
composite. Turn the computer off each time when you want to change 
connections. Try each of the other plugs to locate the audio output. 
If you turn up the volume, you should hear the normal characteristic 
whine of the SID chip. Once you've found all the correct wires, tape 
up the unused plugs so they can't short to anything. Note that there
is only mono audio out of the computer so connect it to the left 
audio input if your monitor is stereo. Many TV's or monitors with 
stereo sound will route the left input to both speakers. 

ALTERNATE S-VIDEO HOOKUP USING A FOUR WIRE CABLE WITH A CBM MONITOR

     Although you should not use a four-wire cable with the rear jacks
of a Commodore monitor, you can try to see if an alternate hookup will
produce an acceptable picture. Switch the monitor to the rear inputs
and turn the computer off. As above, test each of the cable plugs, one
at a time (computer on only to make the test), to find the correct ones.
Two of the four-wire plugs will produce a B/W picture but one of them
will look cleaner on the screen. That's the wide band B/W output.
Connect that one to the yellow input jack of the monitor and the other
video output to the red (color) input jack. You should have a color
picture if the connections are correct. The quality of the picture can
vary depending on the monitor, specifically if it will accept composite
video for its color input. If it looks good, connect the audio and
you're done. Be sure to tape up the unused plug (SID audio input) for
safety!

Ray