										
     I have a collection of Dr. Dean Edell radio shows starting from mid 
2007 until he retired at the end of 2010. These mp3 files have all had the 
commercial breaks removed and are therefore smaller (about 8.5 Megs each) 
than the original 21 Meg commercial downloads from KGO Radio in San Francisco. 
     When I started listening to and saving the Dr. Dean show back in 2007, 
my Internet access was dialup, so I got audio recordings off the local radio 
station when I was at work. I used a VCR set up for automatic recordings at 
the appropriate time as that was the only audio medium available for many 
hours of record time. The recordings were later transcribed to the computer. 
Those first 40 or so audio files are noisy but most are not bad... all are 
listenable. 
     When I finally got DSL for Internet, I started saving the Dr. Dean show 
directly from KGO. If the show was cancelled or corrupted for some reason 
such as a sun outage or corrupt KGO archive file, I picked up a later 
re-broadcast from another station. When Dr. Dean was on vacation or otherwise 
not doing his show on particular days, some of his earlier shows were repeated. 
I did not save repeats in my collection. There are a few late program starts 
when the station overran Dr. Dean for breaking news. Rebroadcasts took care 
of most of that problem. The programs are listed with the original show dates 
as file names in four-month "directories" for each year. The only exception 
is the first 40 shows which were dubbed to a computer from my tapes. I don't 
have dates for those but simply used the tape numbers as filenames.
     If there is any interest in this material, I am prepared to offer it all 
on an 8 Gig USB "thumb" drive for $50 which includes shipping. Because the 
entire collection is so large (about 7 Gigs), I decided against CD's or 
trying to transfer it via the Internet. Of course you can download this off
my website for free. 

Email: rcarlsen at tds dot net. 