Carlsen Electronics... policies and procedures

I've been in the electronics repair business for a long time... almost 40
years. In all that time, I've learned what it takes to make my customers
happy. I always try to imagine myself on the other side of the counter with
that broken gadget in hand. How would I like to be treated?
What do I get for my money? What happens if the problem comes back or
another problem shows up?
My repair policies are simple and straightforward. I give you a free
estimate so you know what the repair will cost before you plunk down any
money. I rely on my experience to tell me if the equipment is economically
repairable, how well it will work, and how long it will last after the
repairs are done. I guess wrong sometimes, but you get the benefit of the
doubt if there is a problem.
If you approve an estimate, I'll order parts (if necessary) and fix the
device. If at that point I find that it's going to cost a little more than
expected, I'll try to fix it for the original estimate anyway. If it's a
lot more, I'll let you know what the increased costs will be and let you
decide if it's worth it to you. You still have not lost anything. I'm the
one doing the gambling... mostly on my experience. If there will be any
delay in getting parts or completing the repair, I'll let you know.
When the device is repaired and you pick it up, my standard warranty is 30
days parts and labor. My repairs rarely "come back", but if that happens,
my policy is: 1. fix it, 2. (depending on what it is) supply you with
another one of equal value, or 3. give you your money back. Your choice. I
allow for a "gray area" of about 90 days (and have allowed longer than that
in some cases) because any good repair should last at least that long if I
did my job correctly. Part of a complete repair is estimating how long the
equipment should last.
Here is an example of a gray area: A VCR gets its belts changed during a
repair. A few months later, the machine develops another fault due to a bad
belt. Well, I know a good belt should last for several years, so I replace
it for free. I assume in that case that the belt just wasn't up to snuff
when I installed it. New parts can fail. As I said, you get the benefit of
the doubt. Perhaps there is something in the machine that overloaded the
belt and made it fail. I've seen that a few times. Perhaps I should have
spotted that the first time... sometimes I goof. That's what my warranty is
really for.
What it all comes down to is this... I'm in business to make money, but not
if I have to make enemies in the process. I want to give you good service
at a fair price. If you're not happy with anything I do, I expect you to
let me know. If it's possible, I'll correct it. I've always enjoyed fixing
things. That's the main reason I do what I do. I trade my knowledge and
experience for money, and we both benefit if I've done my job right.

Ray Carlsen CET
